## TIP (Tcl Improvement Proposal)

### WORK IN PROGRESS

This TIP proposes an enhancement of the proc command to make the handling of the aforementioned options efficient and trivial.  This allows Tcl Programmers to provide a more uniform syntax across their apps without constantly writing slow and error-prone option parsing for each proc.  

This is meant to be a simpler alternative to other proposals such as [TIP-457](http://core.tcl.tk/tips/doc/trunk/tip/457.md) (Named Arguments) which attempt to provide a framework of options and features to arguments.  

## Abstract

This TIP proposes an enhancement of the Tcl language to support option parsing of proc, method, and lambdas (apply).  

## Rationale

Tcl's Built-In commands almost always expect options (- prefixed keys, sometimes followed by a value) followed by the commands arguments.  It is currently fairly difficult (and slow) to mimic this on the Tcl-side as it requires looping through args in most cases.  

We end up with a situation where passing arguments takes on many different forms which do not generally match the built-in commands argument handling.

There are currently two other TIP's providing proposals to how argument handling could be improved ([TIP-457](http://core.tcl.tk/tips/doc/trunk/tip/479.md)) ([TIP-479](http://core.tcl.tk/tips/doc/trunk/tip/479.md)), of these, this proposals goal is to provide a simpler syntax & approach - allowing the command to implement the trivial pieces (upvar, required, defaults).  

## Specification

This TIP calls for an eventual modification to the `proc`, `method`, and `apply` APIs, starting as a separate command (oproc), providing the enhanced option handling mechanics.  For the remainder of this specification, the former (proc) will be assumed.  

Throughout this specification, there are three basic principles of options which will always be followed:

  1. Options may be provided in any order, so-long as they come before the command arguments.
  2. To the parser, options are always optional. It is up to the command to handle options which were expected but not provided or invalid.
  3. Options may or may not require an accompanying value provided when the caller is invoking the command.  Therefore, options will be either one (-opt) or two (-opt value) elements.  It is an error to provide options which do not conform to their defined format.

> Below is a rough outline of the specifics of the specification as this is a WORK IN PROGRESS - feedback welcome :)

- Options handling can be confirmed when all of the following are true:
  1. The first argument begins with a dash followed by the option key (-opt).
  2. Each option key begins with a dash (-), optionally followed by a single value (value name), indicating a value is expected.
  3. Option definitions are terminated by a double-dash (--) at which point standard arguments may be defined `{-opt1 -opt2 val -- foo bar args}`.
- If any of these rules are not met, the result is evaluated normally as a proc/method/apply command.
- A local array `$opts` is provided.  Each opt defined will be defined on the array.  Single element options (-opt) have a boolean value of 1, two element options have a value set to the value given by the caller, or their default value (if any) if it was not defined by the caller.
- The opts array contains an element that contains the raw opts that were used.  This is helpful for passing the opts if needed.  `{*}$opts()`
- See the Implementation for how local variable options can be handled.
- `[info options]` will be provided to get the options spec (if any) of a proc
- `[info object/class options]` will be provided to get the options spec (if any) of a method.

## Declaration Syntax Examples

In order to provide a clear example of how the proposed syntax allows building commands which handle options and arguments similar to Tcl's built-in commands, below are examples of how we would declare procs with the same options as their native counterparts.

> Note that the double-dash (--) value is always optional when invoking any command, but required when defining a command with option parsing.

### [unset](https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.6/TclCmd/unset.htm)

> unset ?-nocomplain? ?--? ?name name name ...?

```tcl
proc unset {-nocomplain -- args} { # Handle # }
```

### [subst](https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.6/TclCmd/subst.htm)

> subst ?-nobackslashes? ?-nocommands? ?-novariables? string

```tcl
proc subst {-nobackslashes -nocommands -novariables -- string} { # Handle # }
```

### [source](https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.6/TclCmd/source.htm)

> source ?-encoding encodingName? fileName

```tcl
proc source {-encoding encodingName -- filename} { # Handle # }
```

### [switch](https://www.tcl.tk/man/tcl8.6/TclCmd/switch.htm)

> switch ?options? string pattern body ?pattern body ...?
>
> switch ?options? string {pattern body ?pattern body ...?}

```tcl
proc switch {
  -exact
  -glob
  -regexp
  -nocase
  -matchvar varName
  -indexvar varName
  -- string pattern args
} { # Handle # }
```

### Lambda

> showing apply with options

```tcl
set lambda {{-foo -bar -- args} { # Handle # }}
set foo [list ::apply $lambda -foo --]
set bar [list ::apply $lambda -bar --]

# called with $opts being -foo 1 and $args being one two three
{*}$foo one two three

# called with $opts being -bar 1 and $args being four five six
{*}$bar four five six
```

### Method

```tcl
::oo::class create foo {
  method bar {-foo -- bar} {

  }
}
```

---

While such a syntax does have a few considerations, it provides a clean syntax for defining the available options which is easily readable, parseable, and enforceable.  Additionally, it allows for automatically generated error messages which can hint at the available option or value.

### Implementation

  - A pure-tcl initial implementation may be found as [optcmds](https://github.com/Dash-OS/tcl-modules/blob/master/optcmds-1.0.4.tm) which provides `oproc`, `oapply`, and `omethod`.
   - > A few deviations are currently required from the specification to provide all features from the spec.  Namely the `-define` option being provided on each command which indicates that we want the compiled command returned rather than invoked (so we can pass it to `::oo::define` or use it as a pre-compiled lambda).
   - > In addition, in this implementation one can change the name of the opts var by providing an option to the oproc/apply/method commands -opts with the desired name of the variable.  `-opts myOptsArray`
   - > For those that are against the creation of the `opts` array, it is opt-out by either giving the opts an empty name (`-opts {}`) or providing the `-noopts` flag to the appropriate optcmd.  This will set any opts as local variables in the procedure body when evaluated.
  -  Tests / Examples can be found [in the examples folder](https://github.com/Dash-OS/tcl-modules/blob/master/examples/optcmds.tcl)

### What about default values?

Default values are implemented for options that have named values defined.  This is done similar to how default Tcl argument handling is done, by providing the default value as the second element.

```tcl
proc somecall {-command callback -timeout {ms 15000} -url url -method {method GET} --} {
  # ... -timeout default is 15000 and -method default is now GET
}
```

> See the [examples](https://github.com/Dash-OS/tcl-modules/blob/master/examples/optcmds.tcl)] for how default values might be implemented into the syntax if the demand is overwhelming.

### What about upvar, switch, and/or required?

All of these extra options could be added to such a specification, but they are trivial and just as performant to implement within the body itself as they can be heavily optimized via bytecode and even further via quadcode.

With that in mind, these "extras" become noise that make the syntax more difficult to learn, read, and understand.

Without these extra options we are able to provide a syntax that quite literally speaks for itself in more ways than one and does not require the excessive bracketing of the other implementations.

In addition, there is likely to be many circumstances, even if these features are provided, that the programmer would just set them as optional anyway so that custom error handling could be provided.

##### Example: required & upvar

For example, if we wanted to implement some required options as well as upvar, it would only take a few lines of familiar code to accomplish.

> This could be further sugared if something like `[dict haskeys $opts -upvar -command]` were instead made available. Giving a general purpose solution benefits more users in more places while maintaining simple & readable syntax.

```tcl
proc myproc {-upvar varname -command callback -- args} {
  if {![dict exists $opts -upvar] || ![dict exists $opts -command]} {
    # throw your error since it is required
  }
  upvar 1 [dict get $opts -upvar] var
}
```

##### Example: switch

Again, too trivial to implement for this to be cause for concern here.  This is another example of where a `haskeys` subcommand for dict could provide beneficial in the sense of `[dict haskeys -any $opts -one -two -three]`.  

While not a perfect replacement in this case, it easily provides the same end result.

```tcl
proc p {-debug -quiet -verbose -- args} {
  if {[dict exists $opts -debug] || [dict exists $opts -verbose]} {
    # log stuff!
  }
}

# or

proc p {-debug -quiet -verbose -- args} {
  set opts [dict keys $opts]
  if {"-debug" in $opts || "-verbose" in $opts} {
    # log stuff!
  }
}
```

### Proposed Changes & Ideas

 1. Allow boolean/toggle options to provide a true/false value.  (-opt or -opt 1 or -opt 0).

 2. Modify the general specification so that it can be extended in the future to take options (allowing it to provide the features of other proposals such as  [TIP-457](http://core.tcl.tk/tips/doc/trunk/tip/479.md)).
   - Likely as simple as allowing the second value to be a list in a similar fashion to how 457's proposal currently defines.
 3. ~~Allow opts to be placed after the command arguments (this would mean args could not be used and is likely not a good solution~~
   - > simply using `$args` should be sufficient in this case.
 4. ~~Instead of a variable (`$opts`), options become local variables within the command body.~~
  - > This is not ideal as the `$opts` dict allows us to easily pass opts on and removes the necessity for either removing the prefixed `-` or having to use `${-opt}` everywhere.

 5. Provide a way for options which may be boolean (-opt) OR value-based (-opt value).
   - One method for declaring this was proposed as `{-opt1 ?valName -opt2 valName -- args}` where `-opt1` could be provided as `procname -opt1` or `procname -opt1 $value`
